# Command Line Arguments

Welcome to my tutorial on how to display command line arguments in C++.

## Section 1: Introduction

In this tutorial, I show you how to display the command line arguments passed to a C++ program.

The command line is where commands, e.g. the name of an executable, is typed into a terminal program. On Windows, the PowerShell application can be used to type commands; on Linux, the Terminal application can be used.

A command line argument is an optional argument passed to a command, e.g. an executable that adds two numbers together might accept two numbers as optional arguments and display the result of the addition operation. 

Command line arguments can be used to modify the behaviour of a program. If a program relies on a command line argument, it typically uses a default value if one is not provided.

The remainder of this tutorial is organised as follows: in Section 2, I present the tools I used to prepare the tutorial; in Section 3, I describe the files included in the tutorial and how to build the tutorial's executable; in Section 4, I described the tutorial's source code; in Section 5, I present an example of the executable's output; and Section 6, I conclude the tutorial.

## Section 2: Tools

To prepare this tutorial, I used the following tools:

1. Qt Creator 4.12.2 (Community)
1. Qt 15.5's MSVC 2019 64-bit kit
1. CMake 3.17.3

You can download Qt from [https://www.qt.io/](https://www.qt.io/). You can download CMake from [https://cmake.org/](https://cmake.org/).

## Section 3: Build Instructions

The tutorial contains the following files:

1. [CMakeLists.txt](CMakeLists.txt)
1. [CMakeLists.txt.user](CMakeLists.txt.user)
1. [main.cpp](main.cpp)
1. [README.md](README.md)

CMakeLists.txt and CMakeLists.txt.user were generated by Qt Creator when the project was created. main.cpp contains the source code that displays the program's command line arguments.

### Qt Creator

To open the tutorial's project file:

1. Open Qt Creator
1. Left click on the "File" menu. Next, left click on "Open File or Project" button. Alternatively, you can use the <kbd>CTRL + O</kbd> shortcut.
1. Browse to where the tutorial's CMakeList.txt file is. Next, left click on the file. Next, left click on the "Open" button.

To compile the tutorial's source code into an executable:

1. Left click on the "Build" menu. Next, left click on the "Build Project "command_line_args"" button. Alternatively, you can use the <kbd>CTRL + B</kbd> shortcut.

To run the tutorial's built executable:

1. Left click on the "Build" menu. Next, left click on the "Run" button. Alternatively, you can use the <kbd>CTRL + R</kbd> shortcut.

## Section 4: main.cpp

The following source code shows how to list the command line arguments passed to the built executable.

[main.cpp](main.cpp)

```cpp
#include <QCoreApplication>

#include <iostream>

int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    QCoreApplication a(argc, argv);

    std::cout << "There are " << argc << " command line arguments." << std::endl;

    for (int i = 0; i < argc; i++)
    {
        std::cout << "argv[" << i << "]: " << std::endl;
        std::cout << argv[i] << std::endl;
    }

    return a.exec();
}

```

Let's go through the source code, line by line, block by block.

On the lines,
```cpp
#include <QCoreApplication>

#include <iostream>
```
the `#include` statement is used to include Qt's QCoreApplication and the standard library's iostream header files. These provide the program access to the Qt framework and allow it to display output via the console.

On the lines, 
```cpp
int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    ...
}
```
the function `main()` is defined. `main()` has two arguments: 1, an integer named `argc`; and 2, a pointer to an array of characters named `argv`. `argc` contains the number of arguments; `argv` contains the arrary of arguments.

On the line,
```cpp
    QCoreApplication a(argc, argv);
```
an instance of the QCoreApplication class named `a` is created. It is instantiatiated with two arguments, `argc` and `argv`. QCoreApplicatio contains the main event loop, whgere all events from the operation system are processed.

On the line,
```cpp
    std::cout << "There are " << argc << " command line arguments." << std::endl;
```
a message indicating the number of command line arguments is displayed.

On the lines,
```cpp
    for (int i = 0; i < argc; i++)
    {
        std::cout << "argv[" << i << "]: " << std::endl;
        std::cout << argv[i] << std::endl;
    }
```
a for loop is used to iterate through the `argv`'s array of characters. During each iteration, a message indicating the array's index and its value is displayed.

On the line,
```cpp
    return a.exec();
```
the object `a`'s `exec()` member funtion is called. It's returned value is then passed to the operating system.

## Section 5: Output

Now that we've looked at the source code, let's run the program. You should expect something similar to the following printed on the console:

```console
There are 3 command line arguments.
argv[0]:
C:\Users\Fraze\Desktop\cpp_programming_tutorials\samples\build-command_line_args-Desktop_Qt_5_15_0_MSVC2019_64bit-Debug\command_line_args.exe
argv[1]:
--name
argv[2]:
Frazer Noble
```

Here, we see that there are 3 command line arguments: 1, the absolute path of the built executable; 2, the first command line argument, "--name"; and 3, the second command line argument, "Frazer Noble".

To can change the command line arguments used in Qt Creator:

1. Left click on the "Projects" button. Next, left click on the "Run" button under the kit used. Next, edit the "Command line arguments" text box.

## Section 6: Conclusion

In this tutorial, I have shown you how to display the command line arguments passed to a C++ program.

I hope this tutorial has been useful.

## Credit

Dr Frazer K. Noble   
Department of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering   
School of Food and Advanced Technology  
Massey University   
New Zealand   